---
title: "BRST"
date: 2012-12-23
draft: false
---

This post has been migrated from my old blog, the [math-physics learning seminar](https://mathphysseminar.blogspot.com/).


Finally, I want to discuss gauge-invariant of the gauge-fixed theory. (!?) We saw in the previous posts that if we have a gauge theory with connection $A$ and matter fields $\psi$, in order to derive sensible Feynman rules we have to introduce a gauge-fixing function $G$ as well as Fermionic fields $c, \bar{c}$, the ghosts. (Note: last time I used $\eta, \bar{\eta}$ for the ghosts but I want to match the more standard notation, so I've switched to $c, \bar{c}$).


Usually it is convenient to use the gauge-fixing function $G(A) = \partial^\mu A_\mu$. Under an infinitesimal gauge-transformation $\lambda$, $A$ transforms as

$$ A \mapsto -\nabla \lambda, $$

so $G(A)$ transforms as

$$ G(A) \mapsto G(A) - \partial^\mu \nabla_\mu \lambda. $$

Hence the term in the Lagrangian involving the ghosts is

$$ -\bar{c}^a \partial^\mu \nabla_\mu^{ab} c^b, $$

and our gauge-fixed Lagrangian is

$$ \mathcal{L} = -\frac{1}{4} |F|^2 + \bar{\psi}(iD\\!\\!\\!/-m)\psi + -\frac{|\partial^\mu A_\mu|^2}{2\xi} - \bar{c}^a \nabla_\mu^{ab} c^b $$

Introducing an auxiliary filed $B^a$, this is of course equivalent to

$$ \mathcal{L} = -\frac{1}{4} |F|^2 + \bar{\psi}(iD\\!\\!\\!/-m)\psi + \frac{\xi}{2} B^a B_a +
 B^a \partial^\mu A_{\mu a} - \bar{c}^a \nabla_\mu^{ab} c^b. $$

Now, there are two questions one might ask: (1) how can we tell that this is a gauge-theory? i.e., what remains of the original gauge symmetry? and (2) does the resulting theory depend in any way on the choice of gauge-fixing function?


The answer to both of these questions is BRST symmetry. The field $c$ is Lie-algebra valued, so we could think of it as being an infinitesimal gauge transformation. Rather, for $\epsilon$ a constant odd variable, $\epsilon c$ is even and an honest infinitesimal gauge transformation. Under this transformation, we have

$$ \delta_\epsilon A = -\nabla (\epsilon c) = -\epsilon \nabla c. $$

Then we define a graded derivation $\delta$ by

$$ \delta A = - \nabla c. $$

We have a grading by ghost number, where $\mathrm{gh}(A) = 0$, $\mathrm{gh}(\psi) = 0$, $\mathrm{gh}(c) = 1$, $\mathrm{gh}(\bar{c}) = -1$. We would like to extend $\delta$ to a derivation of degree $+1$ that squares to 0. First, we should figure out what $\delta c$ is. We compute:

\\begin{align}
0 &= \delta^2 A \\\\\\
&= \delta(-\nabla c) \\\\\\
&= -\partial \delta c - (\delta A) c - A (\delta c) + (\delta c) A - c (\delta A) \\\\\\
&= -\partial \delta c + (\nabla c) c + c (\nabla c) - [A, \delta c] \\\\\\
&= -\nabla(\delta c) + \nabla(c^2).
\\end{align}

From this, we see that $\nabla(\delta c) = \nabla(c^2)$, so we can set

$$ \delta c = c^2 = \frac{1}{2}[c, c]. $$

Then $\delta^2 c = 0$ is just the Jacobi identity for the group's Lie algebra! Finally, we would like to extend $\delta$ to act on $\psi$, $B$, and $\bar{c}$ so that $\delta \mathcal{L} = 0$, and $\delta^2 = 0$. Since the action on $A$ is by infinitesimal gauge transformation, this leaves the curvature term of $\mathcal{L}$ invariant. Similarly, the $\psi$ term is invariant if we simply take

$$ \delta \psi = c \cdot \psi $$

where dot denotes the infinitesimal gauge transformation. Using the known rules for $\delta$, we find that

$$ \delta \mathcal{L} = \frac{\xi}{2} \left(\delta B B + B \delta B \right) + \delta B \cdot \partial^\mu A_\mu -
 B \cdot \partial^\mu \nabla_\mu c - \delta\bar{c} \cdot \partial^\mu \nabla_\mu c $$

By comparing coefficients, we find (together with what we've already computed)

\\begin{align}
\delta A &= -\nabla c \\\\\\
\delta \psi &= c \cdot \psi \\\\\\
\delta c &= \frac{1}{2}[c,c] \\\\\\
\delta \bar{c} &= B \\\\\\
\delta B &= 0.
\\end{align}

This is the BRST differential. Now, suppose that $\mathcal{O}(A, \psi)$ is a local operator involving the physical fields $A$ and $psi$. Then by construction, $\delta O$ is the change of $O$ under an infinitesimal gauge transformation. Hence, we find


An operator $\mathcal{O}$ is gauge invariant $\iff \delta\mathcal{O} = 0$.

Now, suppose the functional measure $\mathcal{D}A \mathcal{D}\psi \mathcal{D}B \mathcal{D}c \mathcal{D}\bar{c}$ is gauge-invariant, i.e. is BRST closed. (This assumption is equivalent to the absence of anomalies, but we'll completely ignore this in today's post.) Then we have

$$ \langle \delta \mathcal{O} \rangle = 0 $$

for any local observable $\mathcal{O}$. This just follows from integration by parts (this is where we have to assume the measure is $\delta$-closed). Now, why is this significant? First, this tells us that the space of physical observables is

$$ H^0(C^\ast_{\mathrm{BRST}}, \delta) $$

where $C^\ast_{\mathrm{BRST}}$ is the cochain complex of local observables, graded by ghost number.


Now, the real power of the BRST formalism is the following. We find that the gauge-fixed Lagrangian can be written as

$$ \mathcal{L}_{gf} = \mathcal{L}_0 +\delta \left(\bar{c} \frac{B}{2} + \bar{c}\Lambda\right) $$

where $ \Lambda = \partial^\mu \nabla_\mu A $ is our gauge-fixing function, and $\mathcal{L}_0$ is the original Lagrangian without gauge-fixing. Now the point is, any two choices of gauge fixing differ by terms which are BRST exact, and hence give the same expectation values on the physical observables $H^0$. So we have restored gauge invariance, while obtaining a gauge-fixed perturbation theory!
